Gut, 1991, 32, 893899

893

Measurement of intracellular mediators in

enterocytes isolated from jejunal biopsy specimens of

control and cystic fibrosis patients

B W Hitchin, P R M Dobson, B L Brown, J Hardcastle, P T Hardcastle, C J Taylor

Abstract

process which increases transepithelial electrical

A method that maximises the yield of viable

activity,' and this can be detected as a rise in

enterocytes has been developed for the isola

short circuit current. In our previous studies,

tion of enterocytes from human jejunal biopsy

changes in transepithelial electrical activity have

specimens. These enterocytes have been used

been used to detect changes in ion transport

to study the values of intracellular free calcium

across the small bowel of biopsy material from

and the rises in adenosine 3' 5'cyclic mono

children with and without cystic fibrosis.' These

phosphate (cAMP) induced by secretagogues

studies have shown that while intestinal tissue

in normal and cystic fibrosis cells. Basal intra

from noncystic fibrosis patients responded to a

cellular free calcium of cystic fibrosis entero

variety of secretagogues with an activation of

cytes, measured fluorimetrically with fura2,

chloride secretion, cystic fibrosis tissue failed to

was within the range of the basal intracellular

exhibit such a response to all secretagogues

free calcium of noncystic fibrosis enterocytes

tested,' indicating the absence of a functional

(cystic fibrosis 263 nmol/l; noncystic fibrosis

mechanism for chloride secretion. Both groups

287 nmol/l). Changes in intracellular free

of tissue showed a normal response to mucosal

calcium were observed after exposure to

glucose, indicative of tissue viability. Thus the

ionomycin: a 100 nmol/l solution induced a 25

intestine, like the epithelia of the airways' and

fold increase in intracellular free calcium in

sweat glands, fails to transport chloride in

the cystic fibrosis enterocytes and a 22 fold

response to stimulation by agents that act via the.

increase in the intracellular free calcium con

second messenger,

adenosine

5'cyclic

centration of the noncystic fibrosis entero

monophosphate (cAMP). In contrast to airway

cytes. Basal cAMP values were not signific

antly different between cystic fibrosis and non

chloride in response to secretagogues that act via

cystic fibrosis enterocytes (cystic fibrosis 575

changes in intracellular calcium,' or guanosine

fmol/100 000 cells; noncystic fibrosis 716 fmol/

3'

5'cyclic monophosphate (cGMP).s The

100000 cells, p005) and the enterocyte

calcium ionophore A23187 did, however, induce

cAMP value increased in response to stimula

a small short circuit current change in some

tion with prostaglandin E2 (7 mol/l) (cystic

cystic fibrosis biopsy specimens,' while barium

fibrosis 22 fold increase over basal, p<005;

chloride, which stimulates intestinal secretion by

noncystic fibrosis 19 fold stimulation over

releasing intracellular calcium,17 1 also increased

basal, p<005) and vasoactive intestinal poly

the short circuit current in both control and

peptide (100 nmol/l) (cystic fibrosis 71 fold

cystic fibrosis biopsy specimens, suggesting

increase over basal,p<005;noncystic fibro

that the mechanism for receptor operated

sis 58 fold increase over basal, p<005).

increase of intracellular calcium may be impaired

There was no significant difference in the

in the intestine of patients with cystic fibrosis. To

magnitude of the response between cystic

determine whether abnormalities in epithelial

fibrosis and noncystic fibrosis enterocytes

ion transport in the small intestine of patients

(p005). These results indicate that the cystic

with cystic fibrosis reflect abnormal regulation of

Institute of

Endocrinology,

fibrosis defect in the small intestine, as in other

second messenger concentrations, cytosolic free

Department of Human

affected epithelia, seems to be distal to the

calcium and cAMP values of enterocytes isolated

Metabolism and Clinical

production of second messengers. The small

from human jejunal biopsy specimens from

Biochemistry, University

Medical School, Sheffield

intestine is therefore an appropriate model in

cystic fibrosis and noncystic fibrosis (control)

BW Hitchin

which to study the biochemical defect in cystic

patients were measured.

PR M Dobson

B L Brown

fibrosis.

Departments of

Methods

Biomedical Science and

Cystic fibrosis is an autosomal recessive disease,

Fura 2/AM and ionomycin were purchased from

Paediatrics, The

characterised by deficient chloride permeability

Calbiochem, Cambridgeshire. (H)inulin and

University, Western

Bank, Sheffield

in epithelia, including sweat glands,'' airways,5

adenosine 3' 5'cyclic monophosphoric acid 2'

J Hardcastle

P T Hardcastle

and intestine.' Although the gene coding for a

Osuccinyltryosine (2'I)methylester were from

C J Taylor

protein associated with the.defect has recently

Amersham International, Amersham, Bucking

Correspondence to:

been identified,s10 the exact biochemical nature

hamshire.

RPMI1640, phosphate buffered

Professor B L Brown, Institute

of the defect remains unknown. It has been

saline (PBS), and penicillin and streptomycin

of Endocrinolog

localised, however, to the apical membrane

were from GibcoEurope, Paisley, Strathclyde.

Metabolism and Clinical

of the affected cells, where regulation of the

Fetal calf serum (FCs) was obtained from

Biochemistry,Beech Hill

chloride channels seems to be impaired,

Northumbria

Biologicals,

Road, Sheffield S10 2RX.

Northumberland.

leading to a failure of the chloride secretory

Accepted for publication

Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) was

4 September 1990

mechanism. Chloride secretion is an electrogenic

obtained

from

Peninsula

Laboratories,

894

Hitchin, Dobson, Brown, Hardcastle, Hardcastle, Taylor

Merseyside. Prostaglandin E (PGE), 3

investigation for malabsorption that was unre

isobutyl1methylxanthine (IBMX),   bovine

sponsive to pancreatic enzymes. Partial villus

serum albumin (BSA) fraction V,hyaluronidase

atrophy was found in one cystic fibrosis patient

type IS, and soybean trypsin inhibitor type IS

associated with a cryptosporadia infection. The

were from Sigma Chemical Co, Poole, Dorset.

control children underwent biopsy as part

Fura 2/AM and IBMX were dissolved in

of their investigation for chronic diarrhoea or

dimethylsulphoxide (DMSO) and were stored at

failure to thrive. Tissue samples used for calcium

20C. The Fura 2/AM was stored in the dark

determinations were obtained from two cystic

under argon at a stock concentration of 2 mmol/l,

fibrosis patients (2 months and 2 years of age)

while the IBMX was stored at a stock concentra

and nine control children (mean age 75 years,

tion of 05 mmol/l. PGE was dissolved in

range 11 months29 years).Biopsy tissue was

ethanol and stored at20C at a stock concentra

obtained either endoscopically from the distal

tion of 10 mg/ml. The concentration of DMSO in

duodenum or via a double port Crosby or

the incubations did not exceed 001%, and the

Watson biopsy capsule from the proximal

concentration of ethanol did not exceed 0001%.

jejunum and placed on ice in oxygen saturated

tissue medium containing 0 1% BSA. The tissue

was divided into 1 mm pieces and the entero

EXPRESSION OF RESULTS

cytes were isolated as described for rat tissue.

The statistics used were Student's t tests, paired

or unpaired as appropriate. The level of statisti

cal significance was set at p<005. Data are

ENTEROCYTE VIABILITYS

expressed as mean (SD), with the number of

Viability was assessed by the ability of the

experiments in parentheses. Each experiment

enterocytes to exclude 005% trypan blue, and

was performed on a separate enterocyte prepara

by assessing the cellular values of both potassium

tion.

and adenosine triphosphate (ATP). For the

trypan blue determinations, the enterocytes

were mixed with trypan blue, left to stand at

ISOLATION OF ENTEROCYTESS

room temperature for two to five minutes, then

the percentage of cells which excluded the dye

Rat tissue

was determined. ATP and potassium values

Male 200250 g Wistar rats fed ad libitum were

were determined in cellular extracts prepared

used for the preparation of enterocytes. The rats

after rapid sedimentation of the cells from the

were killed by cervical dislocation and the small

medium by centrifugation for 15 seconds in a

intestine was quickly removed and flushed free

Beckman microfuge. The cells were extracted

of contents with ice cold PBS. The intestine was

using 05% trichloroacetic acid. ATP in the

opened longitudinally to form a sheet, and the

cellular extracts was determined using a kit

tissue sheets were divided up into approximately

obtained from Sigma Diagnostics, while potas

1 mm' slices. The tissue was washed three times

sium values were determined by flame photo

in sterile tissue medium (RPMI1640 medium

metry using a Corning flame photometer. A

containing 25 mmol/l HEPES, 2 mmol/l gluta

correction was made for trapped extracellular

mine, 001% trypsin inhibitor, 100 U/ml

fluid using ['H]inulin.

penicillin, and 100 g/ml streptomycin) and

transferred to oxygen saturated tissue medium

containing 10% FCS and 015 mg/ml hyaluroni

cAMP ASSAY

dase. It was then incubated over a range of times

Enterocytes were resuspended in tissue medium

at 4C to allow the enzyme to penetrate the tissue

containing 01% BSA at a cell concentration of

without dissociation of the enterocytes. Excess

400000 cells/ml. Cells (100000) were preincu

medium was decanted off to leave moist tissue,

bated with IBMX (1 mmol/l) for 10 minutes at

and the enterocytes were released by gentle

37C. PGE2 or VIP was added to a final concen

tituration of the tissue after a further 30 minutes

tration of 7 mol/l or 100 nmol/l respectively,

incubation at 37C under an atmosphere of 100%

and the cells were incubated for a further period

oxygen. The released enterocytes were collected

(as indicated from each experiment) at 37C. The

by centrifugation at 100 g for two minutes,

reaction was terminated by the addition of ice

washed twice with tissue medium containing

cold ethanol to a final concentration of 65% (vol/

01% BSA by resuspension and centrifugation,

vol). The cAMP was extracted from the cells as

and then counted using either a haemocytometer

described previously,o and was measured by

or a Coulter counter. They were finally resuspen

radioimmunoassay.21

ded in experimental medium at the appropriate

cell concentration for the experiment.

DETERMINATION OF INTRACELLULAR FREE Ca2

VALUES

Human tissue

Enterocytes were resuspended in tissue medium

Tissue samples for cAMP determinations were

containing 01% BSA at a cell concentration of

obtained from five children with cystic fibrosis

13 million cells/ml and were incubated for 30

(mean age 37 years, range 1 month12 years)

minutes at 37C with 2 mol/l Fura 2/AM. The

and 13 control children (mean age 6 years, range

cells were diluted fivefold with tissue medium,

4 months17 years). In one child a biopsy was

washedtwice with fresh tissue medium and once

performed to confirm the diagnosis of cystic

with PBS, then resuspended in oxygen saturated

fibrosis in the face of conflicting sweat test

study buffer (137 mmol/l NaCl, 5 mmol/l KCl,

results; the remaining four children were under

04 mmol/l MgSO4, 05 mmol/l MgCl, 04

895

Measurement of intracellular mediators in enterocytes isolated from jejunal biopsy specimens of control and cystic fibrosis patients

Figure 1:Histological

sections of rat small intestine

incubated with

hyaluronidase (original

magnification 90.(A

before hyaluronidase

treatment,Bafter 30

minutes incubation at 37C,

C)after 120 minutes

incubation at 37C,andD

after 24 hours pretreatment

at4C followed by 30

minutes at 37C.The cells

were isolated as described in

the text,and the remaining

tissue was processed for

histological section.

mmol/l NaHPO4, 1 mmol/l CaCl2, 10 mmol/l

et al.23 The maximum fluorescence Fmax) was

glucose, 1 mmol/l glutamine, 20 mmol/l HEPES,

determined after the addition of 10 mol/l

pH 74) at a concentration of 051 million cells/

digitonin to lyse the cells and the minimum

ml.

fluorescence (Fmin) was obtained by the addi

Fluorescence measurements were made on a

tion of 100 mol/l manganese chloride.

PerkinElmer LS5B luminescence spectro

However, a true Fmax was not obtained using

meter with excitation wavelength at 340 nm

this method since the enterocytes tended to

(5 nm slit) and emission wavelength at 510 nm

aggregate and sediment after addition of the

(10 nm slit). Enterocytes (3 ml) were placed in a

digitonin, causing the calcium fluorescence to

stirred cuvette at room temperature, and intra

rise initially but then apparently to fall. A similar

cellular free calcium was measured essentially as

effect was observed when the enterocytes were

described by Tsien et al? as modified by Wrench

lysed using Triton X100. Ionomycin (100 mol/

896

Hitchin, Dobson, Brown, Hardcastle, Hardcastle, Taylor

500

(6)

rafts of cells rather than single cells, and the cells

produced have been shown to be permeable to

400

(4)

Ca+ and other ions.26 27

Incubation of rat tissue with hyaluronidase for

30 minutes at 37C without any cold exposure

300

released enterocytes mainly from the villus tips

(4)

(compare Fig lA with Fig 1B). The amount of

cells released was increased by incubating the

200 

tissue for longer with the enzyme, but even after

(4)

a two hour incubation large amounts of entero

(6)

100 

cytes remained undissociated from the tissue

(Fig 1C). Tissue samples were therefore incu

bated with hyaluronidase in the cold (4C) to

allow the enzyme to penetrate the tissue in an

0

4

8

16

24

inactive state without dissociation of the cells.

Time (hours)

RPMI1640 has been used for organ culture of

human intestine,, so was used as the incubation

Figure 2: Effect of time of incubation with hyaluronidase in the cold on the yield of rat

medium in these experiments. After cold

enterocytes obtained from rat small intestine after a 30 minute incubation at 37C.Rat small

intestine was incubated with hyaluronidase for a range of times at 4C. At each time point the

enzyme treatment, the tissue was warmed to

37C for 30 minutes to activate the enzyme and

enterocytes were isolated as described in the text and the wet weight of cells was determined.

release the cells. There was little increase in the

cell yield obtained during a 37C incubation after

1), however, caused incomplete calcium release,

the initial four hours of cold exposure (Fig 2);

but at higher concentrations the cells also aggre

but then there was a rapid increase in cell yield

gated. The reported calcium values are therefore

following warm incubation after four to 16 hours

likely to seem high. The intracellular free cal

of cold incubation, with no further increase in

cium was calculated using the equation, Ca2+;=

yield when the period of cold incubation was

224{FFmin}/{FmaxF}, where F is the

extended to 24 hours. By 24 hours most of the

base line level of fluorescence and 224 is the

enterocytes had been released from the tissue

dissociation constant of Fura 2 (in nmol/l). Mini

(Fig 2; Fig 1D). A similar pattern of cell release

mum autofluorescence of the cells was noted and

was also observed for human tissue (Fig 3).

subtracted from all measurements.

CELL VIABILITY

Results

Both rat and human enterocytes isolated with

hyaluronidase at 37C were able to exlude trypan

ISOLATION OF ENTEROCYTES

blue after all time periods of cold enzyme

The two most common methods used to isolate

exposure: the percentage of cells capable of

enterocytes are either hyaluronidase treatment2

excluding trypan blue increased with the time of

or the use of Ca2+ chelators such as EDTA or

prior cold exposure from 8085% exclusion

citrate5 to distrupt epithelial structure. We

without prior cold exposure to 9598% trypan

chose to isolate enterocytes using the former.

blue exclusion after 24 hours prior cold expo

method, since the latter method tends to produce

sure, presumably as the more senescent entero

cytes from the villus tips were autolysed.

0.3

Basal potassium and ATP values of rat

enterocytes remained approximately constant

during the initial 20 hours of cold enzyme

treatment and subsequent warm incubation at

233 to 270 nmol potassium/mg protein and 52 to

5.9 nmol ATP/mg protein, but fell rapidly

between 20 and 24 hours of cold exposure to 120

(8) [3] nmol potassium/mg protein and 31 (04)

[3] nmol ATP/mg protein by 24 hours. Values

for potassium and ATP of human enterocytes

were not obtained for early time points of cold

enzyme treatment, since insufficient cells were

mmio

released. However, the ATP value observed in

human enterocytes prepared after 20 hours of

cold exposure was 50 (03) [3] nmol/mg protein,

which is comparable with the rat enterocyte

0.0

value, and the potassium value was greater than

0

4

8

12

16

20

24

that observed for rat enterocytes at 458 (56) [3]

Time (hours)

nmol/mg protein.

Enterocytes were therefore routinely isolated

Figure 3: Effect of time of incubation with hyaluronidase in

from human jejunal biopsy specimens after incu

the cold on the yield of human enterocytes obtained from

human jejunal biopsy specimens after a 30 minute incubation

bation in the cold for 20 hours with hyaluroni

at 37C. Human small intestinal biopsy specimens were

dase followed by a 30 minute incubation at 37C,

incubated with hyaluronidase for a range of times at 4C.

.At

each time point the enterocytes were isolated as described in the

since this procedure yielded the maximum

text and the mean cell yield was determined. Each value

number of single cells without compromising the

represents a separate preparation.

cellular viability

Measurement of intracellular mediators in enterocytes isolated from jejunal biopsy specimens of control and cystic fibrosis patients

897

Intracellular mediators in control and cystic fibrosis enterocytes

Control

Cystic fibrosis

2000

Calcium (nmol/l)

Basal

28785[9]

26337 [2]

Ionomycin (100 nmol/l

64030[3]

663 [1]

cAMP (fmol/i00 000 cells)

Basal

716 304[13]

57549[5]

VIP(100 nmol/l)

4144445[3]

40611693

PGE7 mol/l

1190445[13]

12514264]

1500

cAMP=adenosine 3'5'cyclic monophosphate; VIP= vascoactive

intestinal polypeptide;PGE=prostaglandin E

Basal and ionomycin stimulated changes in intracellular free

000

calcium values of enterocytes isolated from jejunal biopsy

00 l/loy)

specimens of control and cystic fibrosis patients were determined

as described in the text. For the cAMP detern

nations,

1000

IBMX, and were then incubated for a further five minutes with

either vehicle only basal),VIP,or PGE.The reaction was

Stopped and the cAMP extracted from the cells and analysed as

CAMP

described in the text.

500

INTRACELLULAR FREE CALCIUM

The basal values of intracellular free calcium did

not seem to differ between normal and cystic

fibrosis enterocytes (Table). The intracellular

free calcium concentration of isolated entero

cytes could be increased by exposing the cells to

0

Control

Cystic fibrosis

ionomycin, a nonfluorescent calcium iono

subjects

patients

phore, inducing a 22 fold increase in intracellu

Figure 5:Effect of prostaglandin E2(PGE) stimulation on

lar free calcium of normal enterocytes and a 25

the accumulation of adenosine 3'5'cyclic monophosphate

fold increase in cystic fibrosis enterocytes

(cAMP) in enterocytes isolated from intestinal biopsies of

(Table). However, the enterocytes isolated from

normal and cystic fibrosis patienis. Enterocytes (100 000) were

preincubated for 10 minutes at 37C with 1 mmol/l 3isobutyl

both normal and cystic fibrosis biopsy specimens

1methylxanthine (IBMX). PGE2( mol/l) or vehicle

all failed to respond to secretagogues known to

(ethanol) was added and the cells were incubated for a further

mobilise calcium (acetylcholine, carbachol, sub

5 minutes at 37C.The cAMP was extracted from the cells

and assayed as described in the text. The first value in each

stance P, 5hydroxytryptamine), which act

group represents the basal cAMP accumulated (vehicle only),

mainly through cAMP (PGE2, VIP, dibutyryl

and the second value represents the cAMP accumulated in

cAMP), or which act through cGMP (Escherichia

response to PGEstimulation.Each line represents a separate

coli STa). A range of doses and exposure times to

experiment, and each value is the mean of triplicate

determinations.

each of these agents failed to change the intracel

lular free calcium values within the enterocytes.

cAMP VALUES

The changes in intracellular free calcium values

Enterocytes isolated from human jejunal biopsy

in normal and cystic fibrosis enterocytes in

specimens retained the ability to respond to

response to secretagogue challenge could not,

stimulation by both PGE, and VIP with an

therefore, be compared. This lack of effect of

increase in cAMP. The basal value of cAMP

secretagogues on intracellular calcium values

production of cystic fibrosis enterocytes seemed

was also observed using rat enterocytes prepared

to be lower than that of the normal enterocytes,

by the method of Kimmich.4.

although the difference was not significant,

p005 (Table). In the presence of the phospho

diesterase inhibitor, IBMX, the maximum rise

1000

in cAMP was observed after five minutes of

PGE, stimulation (Fig 4). PGE2 induced a 19

fold increase in cAMP production above basal

800

values in normal enterocytes, p<005 (Fig 5;

Table), which was not significantly different

(p005) from the 22 fold increase over basal

600

values induced in cystic fibrosis enterocytes

(p<005). VIP was found to be a more potent

400

stimulus for cAMP generation in both the

normal and cystic fibrosis enterocytes. The

cAMP values were increased 63 fold in the

200 

control enterocytes compared with a 71 fold rise

in the cystic fibrosis enterocytes(Table), suggest

ing that the cystic fibrosis enterocytes respond as

well as the normal enterocytes to VIP.

0

2

4

6

8

10

Time (minutes)

nophosphate (cAMP) accumulation in

Discussion

Figure 4: Time course of adenosine 3'5'cyclic mon

human enterocytes in response to stimulation by PGE 2. Enterocytes (100 o00) were

A method has been developed for the isolation of

preincubated for 10 minutes at 37C with 1 mmoll 3isobuyl1methylxanthine (1BMX) then

enterocytes from human jejunal biopsy speci

prostaglandin E2(PGE2)(7 mol/l, closed diamonds) or vehicle (basal, closed circles) were

mens which maximises the yield of viable entero

added and the incubation was continued for a range of times up to 10 minutes.The reaction was

cytes obtained. These enterocytes have been

terminated at each time point by the addition of ice cold ethanol, and the cAMP was extracted.

from the cells and assayed as described in the text.

used to study the values of intracellular free

898

Hitchin, Dobson, Brown, Hardcastle, Hardcastle, Taylor

calcium and the increase in cAMP induced by

undetected in the in vitro system. Alternatively,

secretagogues in normal and cystic fibrosis cells.

calcium mobilisation may be of lesser import

The results indicate that the cystic fibrosis

ance in these tissues.

enterocytes retain the ability to respond to

The results obtained with VIP in this study are

secretagogue stimulation with an increase in the

particularly interesting in the light of recent

cAMP value, and there is not significant differ

reports of sparse innervation of cystic fibrosis

ence in either the basal cAMP value or in the

nasal and small intestinal mucosae by fibres that

response to stimulation between normal and

contain immunoreactive VIP.3335 There is not a

cystic fibrosis enterocytes. Previously, similar

generalised loss of these fibres since VIP

results have been obtained using other epithelial

immunoreactive fibres innervating the muscle

tissues that are affected by cystic fibrosis (sweat

layers and myenteric plexus of the intestine are

ducts";

airways

tissues1+42 s;

salivary.

largely unaffected. As there is evidence to sug

glands"; rectum").

gest that VIP is the major noncholinergic trans

Basal intracellular calcium values of cystic

mitter of secretomotor neurones, controlling

fibrosis and normal enterocytes also seem to be

water and electrolyte secretion in the small

similar, but although changes in intracellular

intestine and promoting an increase in blood flow

calcium concentration could be induced by the

to the mucosa,3639 the deficiency of VIP contain

ionophore ionomycin, they were consistently

ing neurones within the mucosa in cystic fibrosis

unresponsive to secretagogues that act via mem

was postulated to contribute to the pathogenesis

brane receptors. This is probably not a consequ

of the disease. Our studies, however, show that

ence of membrane receptor impairment, since

the enterocytes of the intestinal mucosa of cystic

enterocytes isolated under identical conditions

fibrosis patients retain the ability to respond to

were capable of responding to PG and VIP

VIP with an increase in cAMP production that

stimulation with an increased cAMP accumula

was equal in size to the response obtained in

tion. Thus some other factor, perhaps related to

normal tissue. Thus, despite the sparse innerva

either the isolation procedure itself or to the

tion, the receptors for VIP seem to be present on

viability of the enterocytes upon incubation, may

the cystic fibrosis enterocytes and they also seem

contribute to the lack of detectable calcium

to be functionally coupled to adenylyl cyclase.

responses. Basal calcium values for normal and

This was also confirmed in another recent study

cystic fibrosis nasal epithelium were reported by

of fetal intestine," in which the receptors for VIP

Murphy et al2' and more recently by Boucher et

were found to be present in equal abundance

al' and both groups found no significant differ

and to have similar biochemical and functional

ence in the basal calcium concentrations between

properties to those from normal intestine. Thus,

cystic fibrosis and normal cells. Although

the lack of innervation of VIP containing fibres

Boucher et al found an increase in intracellular

to the intestinal mucosa does not seem secondary

free calcium in response to stimulation by brady

to a lack of functional VIP receptors, but may be

kinin which was equal in magnitude between

brought about as a consequence of the ability of

normal and cystic fibrosis cells, Murphy et al

the enterocyte to attract or to sustain the fibres,

were unable to observe changes in intracellular

perhaps as a result of an absent or abnormal

calcium concentrations in response to agents that

membrane protein in the epithelial cells.

increase cAMP. While Murphy et al suggested

The gene coding for the cystic fibrosis defect

that the lack of response may be a consequence of

has recently been identified and sequenced, and

the disaggregation procedure, they concluded

a putative structure determined for the defective

that it was more likely that substantial changes in

protein.1 Called the cystic fibrosis transmem

intracellular calcium concentrations in response

brane conductance regulator (CFTR), the pro

to cAMP accumulation are not a major feature of

tein is proposed to consist of five domains: two

human respiratory epithelia. Values of intra

hydrophobic regions which comprise potential

cellular calcium in mammalian enterocytes

membrane spanning helices; two nucleotide

obtained using fluorescent indicators have not

binding folds; and a large cytoplasmic domain

been previously reported, although values of

which contains consensus sequences for phos

intracellular calcium have been reported for

phorylation by protein kinase C and cAMP

chicken enterocytes,30 31 and these cells have been

dependent kinase. Approximately 70% of cystic

shown to respond to secretagogue challenge with

fibrosis patients seem to share a common muta

an increase in intracellular calcium. These

tion, a deletion of three nucleotides coding for a

responses were small (2565 nmol/l changes),

single phenylalanine residue at the centre of the

however, and were strongly influenced by age,

first nucleotide binding domain. The CFTR

species, and even diet of the donor chicken

shows considerable organisational and structural

(Chang, personal communication). Further

homology with a superfamily of prokaryotic and

more, Chang and coworkers have been unable

eukaryotic transport proteins, all of which seem

to obtain similar data for mammalian cells.

to couple ATP hydrolysis to the pumping of

At least one other group has also attempted

molecules into or out of the cell. By analogy

to obtain values of intracellular calcium for

with these proteins, it has been proposed that the

mammalian

enterocytesusing

fluorescent

cystic fibrosis gene product may be an ATP

indicators,' but without success. The mamma

dependent transport protein, although the

lian enterocyte system does not, therefore, seem

nature. of the transported molecule and the

to be ideal for these types of studies. It may be

precise function of the CFTR, and its relation

that the changes in intracellular calcium values

with chloride channel function, remains unclear.

induced in enterocytes by secretagogue chal

This is compounded by the fact that many of the

lenge are very small or localised to specific

details of the events leading to chloride secretion

cellular pools in vivo, or both, so may be

in normal epithelia are still unknown. It is

Measurement of intracellular mediators in enterocytes isolated from jejunal biopsy specimens of control and cystic fibrosis patients

899

uncertain whether the activated kinases directly

18 Hardcastle J, Hardcastle PT, Noble JM. The secretory action

of barium chloride in rat colon.F

Physiol 1985;361:1933.

affect the chloride channels themselves or a

19 Hardcastle J, Hardcastle PT, Goldhillj, Taylor CJ, Baxter PS.

regulatory protein responsible for chloride chan

Possible target for cystic fibrosis in the small intestinal

nel activity (CFTR?), or whether the activation

epithelium [Letter].Gut 198930:1434

20 Brown BL, Wojcikiewicz RJH, Dobson PRM, Robinson A,

of a further kinase or phosphatase is involved.

Irons LI. Pertussis toxin blocks the inhibitory effect of

Thus, despite cloning of the cystic fibrosis gene

muscarinic cholinergic agonists on cyclic AMP accumula

tion and prolactin secretion in GH anterior pituitary

and elucidation of the putative structure of the

tumour cells.BiochemF 1984223:1459.

21 Harper JF, Brooker G. Femtomole sensitive radioimmuno

CFTR, we are still unclear about the site of

assay for cyclic AMP and cyclic GMP after 2'O acetylation

action of the cystic fibrosis defect. It is evident,

by acetic anhydride in aqueous solution. F Cyclic Nucleotide

Res 19751:20718.

however, that the site of the defect is distal to the

22 Tsien RY, Pozzan T, Rink TJ. Calcium homoestasis in intact

production of cAMP in all of the cell types, and

lymphocytes: cytosolic free calcium monitored with a new

intracellular trapped fluorescent indicator. F Cell Biol 1982;

will presumably occur at a site which is at or close

94:32534.

to the chloride channel, at a point in the signal

23 Wrench IJ,Brown TJ Brown BLDobson PRM.The effect

of fetal calf serum on intracellular calcium in GH cells.

transduction cascade which is perhaps common

Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1988;156:14118.

to all of the signal transduction pathways. The

24 Kimmich GA.Preparation and characterization of isolated

development of a method for isolation of high

transport. In: Korn ED,ed.Methods in membrane biology.

yields of viable enterocytes from a single jejunal

Vol 5.Transport.Oxford:Plenum Press1975.

biopsy specimen described in this paper should

25 Weiser MM. Intestinal epithelial cell'surface membrane

glycoprotein synthesis. I An indicator of cellular differen

facilitate the investigation of this defect in intes

tiation.FCell Biol 1973248:253641.

26 Mian N,Pover WRF. The loss of cellular material from

tinal cells.

suspensions of isolated epithelial cells of guinea pig small

intestine.Biomedicine 1974;20:18691

27 Velasco G, Dominguez P, Shears SB, Lazo PS. Permeability

This work was supported by a grant from the Cystic Fibrosis

properties of isolated enterocytes from rat small intestine.

Trust,UK.

Biochim Biophys Acta 1986;889:3615.

29 Murphy E, Cheng E, Yankaskas j, Stutts MJ, Boucher RC.

intestine.Meth Cell Biol 198021:36584

1 Quinton PM.Missing Cl conductance in cystic fibrosis. Am

Cell calcium levels of normal and cystic fibrosis epithelium.

Physiol 1986;251C64952.

Pediatr Res 198824:7984.

2 Quinton PM. Defective epithelial ion transport in cystic

30 Chang EB, Brown DR, Wang NS, Field M. Secretagogue

fibrosis.ClinChem 198935:72630.

induced changes in membrane permeability in chicken and

3 Knowles MR, Stutts MJ, Spock A, Fischer N, Gatzy JT,

chinchilla ileal mucosa.FClin Invest 1986;78: 2817.

Boucher RC.Abnormal ion permeation through cystic

31 Hirose R,Chang EB.Effects of serotonin on NaH exchange

and intracellular calcium in isolated enterocytes. Am

4 Widdicombe JH, Welsh MJ, Finkbeiner WE. Cystic fibrosis

Physiol 1988;254:G8917

decreases the apical membrane chloride permeability of

32 Velasco G Shears SB, Michell RH Lazo PS.Calcium uptake

monolayers cultured from cells of tracheal epithelium.Proc

Natl Acad Sci USA 1985;82:616771.

Effect of inositiol 1,4,5trisphosphate.Biochem Biophys Res

5 Boucher RC, Cheng EHC, Paradiso AM, Stutts MJ, Knowles

Commun 1986139:6128.

MR, Earp HS.Chloride secretory response of cystic fibrosis

33 HeinzErian P, Dey RD, Flux M, Said SI. Deficient vasoac

human airway epithelia. Preservation of calcium but not

tive intestinal peptide innervation in the sweat glands of

protein kinase Cand Adependent mechanisms.F Clin

cystic fibrosis patients. Science 1985; 229: 14078.

Invest 198984:142431.

34 HeinzErian P, Said SI. Vasoactive intestina! peptide as a

6 Berschneider HM, Knowles MR,Azizkhan RGBoucher RC

regulator of exocrine function in cystic fibrosis. In: Said SI,

Tobey NA, Orlando RC, et al. Altered intestinal chloride

Mutt V, eds. Vasoactive intestinal peptide and related

transport in cystic fiboris.FASEBF 1988;2:26259

7 Taylor CJ, Baxter PS, Hardcastle J, Hardcastle PT. Failure to

35 Wattachow DA, Furness jB, Gibbins iL, Littile KE, Carter

induce secretion in jejunal biopsies from children with cystic

RF.Vasoactive intestinal peptide immunoreactive nerve

fibrosis.Gut 198829:95762.

fibres are deficient in intestinal and nasal mucosa affected by

8 Rommens JM Iannuzzi MC, Kerem BS, Drumm ML

cystic fibrosis.FGastroenterol Hepatol 1988;3:54955.

Melmer GDean Met al.Identification of the cystic fibrosis

36 Gaginella TS, Hubel KA,ODorisio JM.Effects of vasoactive

gene: chromosome walking and jumping. Science 1989; 245:

intestinal peptide on intestinal chloride secretion. In: Said

105965

SI,ed.Vasoactive intestinal peptide.New York: Raven Press,

9 Riordan JR Rommens JMKerem BS Alon NRozmahel R

1982: 21122.

Grzelczak Z, et al. Identification of the cystic fbrosis gene:

37 Said S. Vasoactive intestinal peptide. F Endocrinol Invest 1986;

cloning and characterization of complementary" DNA.

38 Donowitz M, Welsh MJ. Regulation of mammalian small

9:191200.

10 Kerem BS, Rommens JM, Buchanan JA, Markiewicz D, Cox

intestinal electrolyte secretion. In: Johnson LR, ed.

TK,Chakravarti A, et al. Identification of the cystic fibrosis

Physiology of the gastrointestinal tract.New York: Raven

gene: genetic analysis.Science 1989245:107380.

Press1987:135188.

11 Frizzell RA, Rechkemmer G, Shoemaker RL. Altered regula

39 Furness JBCosta M.The enteric nervous system.Edinburgh

tion of airway epithelial cell chloride channels in cystic

ChurchillLivingstone,1987.

fibrosis.Science 1986;233:55860.

40 Chastre E, Bawab W,Faure C, Emami S,Muller F,Boue A,

12 Boucher RC, Cotton CU, Gatzy JT, Knowles MR, Yankaskas

et al. Vasoactive intestinal peptide and its receptors in fetuses

JR.Evidence for reduced CI and increased Na perme

with cystic fibrosis. Am F Physiol 1989; 257: G5619.

ability in cystic fibrosis human primary cultures. F Physiol

41 Sato K, Sato F. Defective betaadrenergic response of cystic

1988405:77103.

fibrosis sweat glands in vivo and in vitro.FClin Invest 1984;

13 Frizzell RA, Field M, Schultz SG. Sodiumcoupled chloride

73:176371.

transport by epithelial tissues.Am F Physiol 1979236:

42 Widdicombe JH.Cystic fibrosis and adrenergic response of

F18

airway epithelial cell cultures.Am F Physiol 1986;251

14 Welsh MJ, Leidtke CM.Chloride and potassium channels in

R81822

cystic fibrosis airway epithelium.Nature 1986;322: 46770.

43 McPherson MA, Dormer RL, Bradbury NA,Dodge JA,

15 Boucher RC, Cheng EStutts MJ Knowles MR, Earp HS.

Goodchild MC. Defective adrenergic secretory responses

Selective induction of Cl secretion in cystic fibrosis nasal

in submandibular acinar cells from cystic fibrosis patients.

epithelium by a calcium ionophore (A23187). Am Rev Respir

Lancet 1986ii 10078.

Dis 1987135:140A.

44 Goldstein JLNash NTAlBazzaz F,Layden TL Rao MC.

16 Baxter PSGoldhillJHardcastle JHardcastle PT Taylor CJ.

Rectum' has abnormal ion transport but normal cAMP

Accounting for cystic fibrosis. Nature 1988; 335: 211.

binding proteins in cystic fibrosis. Am F Physiol 1988; 254:

17 Hardcastle J, Hardcastle PT, Noble JM. The effects of barium

C71924

chloride on intestinal secretion in the rat. F Physiol 1983;

45 Higgins C. Protein joins transport family. Nature 1989; 341:

344:6980

103.